README.rst, before:

===============================================================================
Python wrapper for the UNIX "dialog" utility
===============================================================================
Easy writing of graphical interfaces for terminal-based applications
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Overview
--------

pythondialog is a Python wrapper for the UNIX dialog_ utility
originally written by Savio Lam and later rewritten by Thomas E. Dickey.
Its purpose is to provide an easy to use, pythonic and as complete as
possible interface to dialog_ from Python code.

.. _dialog: http://invisible-island.net/dialog/dialog.html

pythondialog is free software, licensed under the GNU LGPL (GNU Lesser
General Public License). Its home page is located at:

  http://pythondialog.sourceforge.net/

and contains a `short example`_, screenshots_, a `summary of the recent
changes`_, links to the `pydoc3-generated documentation`_, the `Git
repository`_, the `mailing list`_, the `issue tracker`_, etc.

.. _short example:  http://pythondialog.sourceforge.net/#example
.. _screenshots:    http://pythondialog.sourceforge.net/gallery.html
.. _summary of the recent changes:
                    http://pythondialog.sourceforge.net/news.html
.. _pydoc3-generated documentation:
                    http://pythondialog.sourceforge.net/doc/pythondialog.html
.. _Git repository: https://sourceforge.net/p/pythondialog/code/
.. _mailing list:   https://sourceforge.net/p/pythondialog/mailman/
.. _issue tracker:  https://sourceforge.net/p/pythondialog/_list/tickets

If you want to get a quick idea of what this module allows one to do,
you can download a release tarball and run demo.py::

  python3 demo.py


What is pythondialog good for? What are its limitations?
--------------------------------------------------------

As you might infer from the name, dialog is a high-level program that
generates dialog boxes. So is pythondialog. They allow you to build nice
interfaces quickly and easily, but you don't have full control over the
widgets, nor can you create new widgets without modifying dialog itself.
If you need to do low-level stuff, you should have a look at ncurses or
slang instead. For sophisticated text-mode interfaces, the `Urwid Python
library`_ looks rather interesting, too.

.. _Urwid Python library: http://excess.org/urwid/


Requirements
------------

* As of version 2.12, the reference implementation of pythondialog
  (which this file belongs to) requires Python 3.0 or later in the 3.x
  series. pythondialog 3.0.1 has been tested with Python 3.2 and 3.3.

* However, in order to help users who are somehow forced to still use
  Python 2 (even though Python 3.0 was released on December 3, 2008), a
  backport of the reference implementation to Python 2 has been
  prepared. At the time of this writing, the latest pythondialog version
  backported this way is 3.0.1. For up-to-date information about this
  backport, please visit the `pythondialog home page`_.

  .. _pythondialog home page: http://pythondialog.sourceforge.net/

* Apart from that, pythondialog requires the dialog_ program (or a
  drop-in replacement for dialog). You can download dialog from:

    http://invisible-island.net/dialog/dialog.html

  Note that some features of pythondialog may require recent versions of
  dialog.


Quick installation instructions
-------------------------------

If you have a working `pip <https://pypi.python.org/pypi/pip>`_ setup,
you should be able to install pythondialog with::

  pip install pythondialog

When doing so, make sure that your ``pip`` executable runs with the
Python 3 installation you want to install pythondialog for.

For more detailed instructions, you can read the INSTALL file from a
release tarball. You may also want to consult the `pip documentation
<https://pip.pypa.io/>`_.


Documentation
-------------

pythondialog is fully documented through Python docstrings. This
documentation can be browsed with the pydoc3 standalone program or by
simply opening dialog.py in a pager or editor. The documentation of the
latest version as rendered by pydoc3 should be available at:

  http://pythondialog.sourceforge.net/doc/pythondialog.html

To generate the documentation yourself from dialog.py, you can type
"pydoc3 dialog" at the command prompt in the pythondialog base directory
or "pydoc3 /path/to/dialog.py". Alternatively, you can type::

   >>> import dialog; help(dialog)

at a Python command prompt (corresponding to the Python version you
installed pythondialog for, of course).

You can extract the documentation from dialog.py to an HTML file with
"pydoc3 -w dialog" or "pydoc3 -w /path/to/dialog.py". This will generate
dialog.html in the current directory.

Alternatively, if pythondialog is already installed, pydoc3 can act as
an HTTP server and provide the documentation to web browsers. For
instance, launching "pydoc3 -p 1234" will make it listen on TCP
port 1234. You can then point your browser to http://localhost:1234/ and
read the documentation.

See the pydoc module documentation for more information.


Enabling Deprecation Warnings
-----------------------------

There are a few places in dialog.py that send a DeprecationWarning to
warn developers about obsolete features. However, because of:

  - the dialog output to the terminal;
  - the fact that such warnings are silenced by default since Python 2.7
    and 3.2;

you have to do two things in order to see them:

  - redirect the standard error stream to a file;
  - enable the warnings for the Python interpreter.

For instance, to see the warnings produced when running the demo, you
can do::

   python3 -Wd demo.py 2>/path/to/file

and examine /path/to/file. This can also help you to find files that are
still open when your program exits.

**Note:**

  If your program is terminated by an unhandled exception while stderr
  is redirected as in the preceding command, you won't see the traceback
  until you examine the file stderr was redirected to. This can be
  disturbing, as your program may exit with no apparent reason in such
  conditions.

For more explanations and other methods to enable deprecation warnings,
please refer to:

  http://docs.python.org/3/whatsnew/2.7.html


Troubleshooting
---------------

If you have a problem with a pythondialog call, you should read its
documentation and the dialog(1) manual page. If this is not enough, you
can enable logging of shell command-line equivalents of all dialog calls
made by your program with a simple call to Dialog.setup_debug(), first
available in pythondialog 2.12. An example of this can be found in
demo.py.

As of version 2.12, you can also enable this debugging facility for
demo.py by calling it with the --debug flag (cf. 'demo.py --help').


Using Xdialog instead of dialog
-------------------------------

As far as I can tell, Xdialog has not been ported to GTK+ 2 or later. It
is not in Debian stable nor unstable (June 23, 2013). It is not
installed on my system (because of the GTK+ 1.2 dependency), and
according to the Xdialog-specific patches I received from Peter Åstrand
in 2004, was not a drop-in replacement for dialog (in particular,
Xdialog seemed to want to talk to the caller through stdout instead of
stderr, grrrrr!).

All this to say that, even though I didn't remove the options to use
another backend than dialog, nor did I remove the handful of little,
non-invasive modifications that help pythondialog work better with
Xdialog, I don't really support the latter. I test everything with
dialog, and nothing with Xdialog.

That being said, here is the *old* text of this section (from 2004), in
case you are still interested:

  Starting with 2.06, there is an "Xdialog" compatibility mode that you
  can use if you want pythondialog to run the graphical Xdialog program
  (which *should* be found under http://xdialog.free.fr/) instead of
  dialog (text-mode, based on the ncurses library).

  The primary supported platform is still dialog, but as long as only
  small modifications are enough to make pythondialog work with Xdialog,
  I am willing to support Xdialog if people are interested in it (which
  turned out to be the case for Xdialog).

  The demo.py from pythondialog 2.06 has been tested with Xdialog 2.0.6
  and found to work well (barring Xdialog's annoying behaviour with the
  file selection dialog box).


Whiptail, anyone?
-----------------

Well, pythondialog seems not to work very well with whiptail. The reason
is that whiptail is not compatible with dialog anymore. Although you can
tell pythondialog the program you want it to invoke, only programs that
are mostly dialog-compatible are supported.


History
-------

pythondialog was originally written by Robb Shecter. Sultanbek Tezadov
added some features to it (mainly the first gauge implementation, I
guess). Florent Rougon rewrote most parts of the program to make it more
robust and flexible so that it can give access to most features of the
dialog program. Peter Åstrand took over maintainership between 2004 and
2009, with particular care for the Xdialog support. Florent Rougon took
over maintainership again starting from 2009...

.. 
  # Local Variables:
  # coding: utf-8
  # fill-column: 72
  # End:

Commit message:

New 'examples' directory; examples using 'autowidgetsize'
* demo.py, simple_example.py: move to the new 'examples' directory.

* New subdirectory of 'examples' named 'with-autowidgetsize', containing
copies of demo.py and simple_example.py using the 'autowidgetsize'
option (small modifications have been necessary in order to preserve
correct display).

README.rst, after:

===============================================================================
Python wrapper for the UNIX "dialog" utility
===============================================================================
Easy writing of graphical interfaces for terminal-based applications
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Overview
--------

pythondialog is a Python wrapper for the UNIX dialog_ utility
originally written by Savio Lam and later rewritten by Thomas E. Dickey.
Its purpose is to provide an easy to use, pythonic and as complete as
possible interface to dialog_ from Python code.

.. _dialog: http://invisible-island.net/dialog/dialog.html

pythondialog is free software, licensed under the GNU LGPL (GNU Lesser
General Public License). Its home page is located at:

  http://pythondialog.sourceforge.net/

and contains a `short example`_, screenshots_, a `summary of the recent
changes`_, links to the `pydoc3-generated documentation`_, the `Git
repository`_, the `mailing list`_, the `issue tracker`_, etc.

.. _short example:  http://pythondialog.sourceforge.net/#example
.. _screenshots:    http://pythondialog.sourceforge.net/gallery.html
.. _summary of the recent changes:
                    http://pythondialog.sourceforge.net/news.html
.. _pydoc3-generated documentation:
                    http://pythondialog.sourceforge.net/doc/pythondialog.html
.. _Git repository: https://sourceforge.net/p/pythondialog/code/
.. _mailing list:   https://sourceforge.net/p/pythondialog/mailman/
.. _issue tracker:  https://sourceforge.net/p/pythondialog/_list/tickets

If you want to get a quick idea of what this module allows one to do,
you can download a release tarball and run demo.py::

  python3 examples/demo.py


What is pythondialog good for? What are its limitations?
--------------------------------------------------------

As you might infer from the name, dialog is a high-level program that
generates dialog boxes. So is pythondialog. They allow you to build nice
interfaces quickly and easily, but you don't have full control over the
widgets, nor can you create new widgets without modifying dialog itself.
If you need to do low-level stuff, you should have a look at ncurses or
slang instead. For sophisticated text-mode interfaces, the `Urwid Python
library`_ looks rather interesting, too.

.. _Urwid Python library: http://excess.org/urwid/


Requirements
------------

* As of version 2.12, the reference implementation of pythondialog
  (which this file belongs to) requires Python 3.0 or later in the 3.x
  series. pythondialog 3.0.1 has been tested with Python 3.2 and 3.3.

* However, in order to help users who are somehow forced to still use
  Python 2 (even though Python 3.0 was released on December 3, 2008), a
  backport of the reference implementation to Python 2 has been
  prepared. At the time of this writing, the latest pythondialog version
  backported this way is 3.0.1. For up-to-date information about this
  backport, please visit the `pythondialog home page`_.

  .. _pythondialog home page: http://pythondialog.sourceforge.net/

* Apart from that, pythondialog requires the dialog_ program (or a
  drop-in replacement for dialog). You can download dialog from:

    http://invisible-island.net/dialog/dialog.html

  Note that some features of pythondialog may require recent versions of
  dialog.


Quick installation instructions
-------------------------------

If you have a working `pip <https://pypi.python.org/pypi/pip>`_ setup,
you should be able to install pythondialog with::

  pip install pythondialog

When doing so, make sure that your ``pip`` executable runs with the
Python 3 installation you want to install pythondialog for.

For more detailed instructions, you can read the INSTALL file from a
release tarball. You may also want to consult the `pip documentation
<https://pip.pypa.io/>`_.


Documentation
-------------

pythondialog is fully documented through Python docstrings. This
documentation can be browsed with the pydoc3 standalone program or by
simply opening dialog.py in a pager or editor. The documentation of the
latest version as rendered by pydoc3 should be available at:

  http://pythondialog.sourceforge.net/doc/pythondialog.html

To generate the documentation yourself from dialog.py, you can type
"pydoc3 dialog" at the command prompt in the pythondialog base directory
or "pydoc3 /path/to/dialog.py". Alternatively, you can type::

   >>> import dialog; help(dialog)

at a Python command prompt (corresponding to the Python version you
installed pythondialog for, of course).

You can extract the documentation from dialog.py to an HTML file with
"pydoc3 -w dialog" or "pydoc3 -w /path/to/dialog.py". This will generate
dialog.html in the current directory.

Alternatively, if pythondialog is already installed, pydoc3 can act as
an HTTP server and provide the documentation to web browsers. For
instance, launching "pydoc3 -p 1234" will make it listen on TCP
port 1234. You can then point your browser to http://localhost:1234/ and
read the documentation.

See the pydoc module documentation for more information.


Enabling Deprecation Warnings
-----------------------------

There are a few places in dialog.py that send a DeprecationWarning to
warn developers about obsolete features. However, because of:

  - the dialog output to the terminal;
  - the fact that such warnings are silenced by default since Python 2.7
    and 3.2;

you have to do two things in order to see them:

  - redirect the standard error stream to a file;
  - enable the warnings for the Python interpreter.

For instance, to see the warnings produced when running the demo, you
can do::

   python3 -Wd examples/demo.py 2>/path/to/file

and examine /path/to/file. This can also help you to find files that are
still open when your program exits.

**Note:**

  If your program is terminated by an unhandled exception while stderr
  is redirected as in the preceding command, you won't see the traceback
  until you examine the file stderr was redirected to. This can be
  disturbing, as your program may exit with no apparent reason in such
  conditions.

For more explanations and other methods to enable deprecation warnings,
please refer to:

  http://docs.python.org/3/whatsnew/2.7.html


Troubleshooting
---------------

If you have a problem with a pythondialog call, you should read its
documentation and the dialog(1) manual page. If this is not enough, you
can enable logging of shell command-line equivalents of all dialog calls
made by your program with a simple call to Dialog.setup_debug(), first
available in pythondialog 2.12. An example of this can be found in
demo.py from the 'examples' directory.

As of version 2.12, you can also enable this debugging facility for
demo.py by calling it with the --debug flag (cf. 'demo.py --help').


Using Xdialog instead of dialog
-------------------------------

As far as I can tell, Xdialog has not been ported to GTK+ 2 or later. It
is not in Debian stable nor unstable (June 23, 2013). It is not
installed on my system (because of the GTK+ 1.2 dependency), and
according to the Xdialog-specific patches I received from Peter Åstrand
in 2004, was not a drop-in replacement for dialog (in particular,
Xdialog seemed to want to talk to the caller through stdout instead of
stderr, grrrrr!).

All this to say that, even though I didn't remove the options to use
another backend than dialog, nor did I remove the handful of little,
non-invasive modifications that help pythondialog work better with
Xdialog, I don't really support the latter. I test everything with
dialog, and nothing with Xdialog.

That being said, here is the *old* text of this section (from 2004), in
case you are still interested:

  Starting with 2.06, there is an "Xdialog" compatibility mode that you
  can use if you want pythondialog to run the graphical Xdialog program
  (which *should* be found under http://xdialog.free.fr/) instead of
  dialog (text-mode, based on the ncurses library).

  The primary supported platform is still dialog, but as long as only
  small modifications are enough to make pythondialog work with Xdialog,
  I am willing to support Xdialog if people are interested in it (which
  turned out to be the case for Xdialog).

  The demo.py from pythondialog 2.06 has been tested with Xdialog 2.0.6
  and found to work well (barring Xdialog's annoying behaviour with the
  file selection dialog box).


Whiptail, anyone?
-----------------

Well, pythondialog seems not to work very well with whiptail. The reason
is that whiptail is not compatible with dialog anymore. Although you can
tell pythondialog the program you want it to invoke, only programs that
are mostly dialog-compatible are supported.


History
-------

pythondialog was originally written by Robb Shecter. Sultanbek Tezadov
added some features to it (mainly the first gauge implementation, I
guess). Florent Rougon rewrote most parts of the program to make it more
robust and flexible so that it can give access to most features of the
dialog program. Peter Åstrand took over maintainership between 2004 and
2009, with particular care for the Xdialog support. Florent Rougon took
over maintainership again starting from 2009...

.. 
  # Local Variables:
  # coding: utf-8
  # fill-column: 72
  # End:
